Create rule S7132 std::string_view::data() should not be passed to API expecting C-style strings CPP-5820 (#4448)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S7132/cfamily/rule.adoc

This is usually not a problem when working with `string_view`, but can become one when a pointer to the start of the string is extracted from a `string_view` by calling `data()`. This pointer will usually not point to a string with a null character at the right place, and if passed to a function that expects a null-terminated string, this function will not be able to determine the end of the `string_view`.

This kind of situation usually happens when partially modernizing code that used to work with C-style strings or `std::string` to use `std::string_view` instead.

[source,cpp]
----
void v1(char *s) { // Initial, C-style code
    doSomething(strlen(s));
}

void v2(std:::string const &s) { // Modernized code, not optimal, but correct with minimal changes
    doSomething(strlen(s.data()));
}

void v3(std::string_view s) { // Second modernization step, becomes incorrect
    doSomething(strlen(s.data())); // Noncompliant
}
----

This rules raises an issue when the result of calling `data()` on a `string_view` (or any specialization of `std::basic_string_view`) is passed to:

> * a one-argument constructor of `std::string` or `std::basic_string_view` or wide-string variants of those classes,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* a one-argument constructor of `std::string` or `std::string_view` and wide and unicode variants of those classes,
```

Reviewer: The mix of `basic_string_view` and wide variants of it sounded strange.

== Why is this an issue?

In C, and to some extend in {cpp}, strings are arrays of characters terminated by a null character that is used as a sentinel denoting the end of the string.  Therefore, it is common to pass to a function a pointer to the start of a string and expect it to iterate on the content until it reaches the final null character.

> `std::string_view` takes another approach: It stores a pointer to the start of the string and the length of the string. This allows, in particular, to have a `string_view` that refers to a substring of a string. In such situations, the `string_view` will not be null-terminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`std::string_view` takes another approach: It stores a pointer to the start of the string and the length of the string. This allows, in particular, to have a `string_view` that refers to a substring of a string. In such situations, the `string_view` will not be null-terminated.
```

When we refer to a substring of the string, the string is null-terminated, and we will get a different (longer) content. I think we need to rephase this a bit.

> `std::string_view` takes another approach: It stores a pointer to the start of the string and the length of the string. This allows, in particular, to have a `string_view` that refers to a substring of a string. In such situations, the `string_view` will not be null-terminated.

Reviewer: I would rework the last sentence to say that in such a situation, the last character of the string view will not be followed by the null terminator.

> This is usually not a problem when working with `string_view`, but can become one when a pointer to the start of the string is extracted from a `string_view` by calling `std::string_view::data()`. This pointer points to a non null-terminated string, and if passed to a function that expects a null-terminated string, this function will not be able to determine the end of the string.

Reviewer: I would say is not guaranteed to point. Because, in most cases, it points to a null-terminated string.

This kind of situation usually happens when partially modernizing code that used to work with C-style strings or `std::string` to use `std::string_view` instead.

> 

Reviewer: I would insert a noncompliant example here.

Reviewer: Looks good, I would mention `S7121` on example and in related rules.

> This rules raises an issue when `std::string_view::data()` is passed to a one-argument constructor of `std::string` or `std::string_view` or to any function from the C standard library that expects a null-terminated string.

Reviewer: The rule should also cover `wstring_view` and corresponding functions.

=== What is the potential impact?

If the `string_view` refers to a part of a larger string that is itself null-terminated, the function will read past the end of the view, until the end of the underlying string. This could yield stange results, and potentially leak sensitive information. 

[source,cpp]
----
std::string credentials = getCredentials(); // Expects a string "user:password"
auto user = std::string_view(credentials.c_str(), credentials.find(':'));
// This will print the user name, but will not stop at the end of the user name,
// it will also print the password.
printf("User: %s", user.data()); 
----

The discrepancy between `std::string_view::size()` and the number of characters read by a function considering the string to be null-terminated could also lead to buffer overflows.

[source,cpp]
----
char *userBuffer = new char[user.size() + 1];

> strcpy(userBuffer, user.data()); // Buffer overflow

Reviewer: Same here.

----

In the general case, if the `string_view` does not refer to (part of) a null-terminated string, any function that expects a null-terminated string will lead to a buffer overflow.

== How to fix it

=== When working with {cpp} types

When constructing a `std::string` or another `std::string_view` from a `string_view`, you don't have to call `data`, specific constructors already exist for this purpose.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void f(std::string_view sv) {
    std::string s(sv.data()); // Noncompliant
    std::string_view sv2(sv.data()); // Noncompliant
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
void f(std::string_view sv) {
    std::string s(sv); // Noncompliant
    std::string_view sv2(sv); // Noncompliant
}
----

=== When working with the C library

> When calling a function from the C library that expect a C-style string argument, the best is usually to use a replacement for that function that directly works with `std::string_view`.

Reviewer: I would show the examples of replacement:
*  `strcpy` with `std::string`  or std::copy
* `printf` with format or ostringstrream

Reviewer: And also general, make a `std::string` so it is nullterminated, and you can pass `c_str.`
